---
title: "Ten simple rules for writing and sharing computational analyses in Jupyter Notebooks"
collection: publications
pubtype: paper
permalink: /publication/2019-07-25-ten-simple-rules-jupyter
excerpt: 'Ten simple rules for writing and sharing computational analyses in Jupyter Notebooks'
date: 2019-07-25
venue: 'PLoS Computational Biology'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007007'
citation: 'Rule A, Birmingham A, Zuniga C, Altintas I, Huang SC, Knight R, <b>Moshiri N</b>, Nguyen M, Rosenthal SB, Perez F, Rose P (2019). "Ten simple rules for writing and sharing computational analyses in Jupyter Notebooks." <i>PLoS Computational Biology</i>. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007007" target="_blank">doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007007</a>'
---
As studies grow in scale and complexity, it has become increasingly difficult to provide clear descriptions and open access to the methods and data needed to understand and reproduce computational research. Numerous papers, including several in the Ten Simple Rules collection, have highlighted the need for robust and reproducible analyses in computational research, described the difficulty of achieving these standards, and enumerated best practices. We aim to augment this existing wellspring of advice by addressing the unique challenges and opportunities that arise when using computational notebooks, especially Jupyter Notebooks, for research.

Reproducibility, the scientific standard that others should be able to recreate your results, requires at a minimum that "data and the computer code used to analyze [that] data be made available to others". Achieving even this minimum standard typically requires both machine-readable descriptions of the data, software, dependencies, and computational environment involved (for example, hardware or cloud configuration), as well as human-readable documentation describing how all these pieces fit together. Whereas analysts previously kept code, documentation, and results in separate files, they increasingly use computational notebooks such as Jupyter Notebooks and R Notebooks to both perform analyses and combine code, results, and descriptive text in a single "computational narrative" to be read and rerun by others. This ability to combine executable code and descriptive text in a single document has close ties to Knuth’s notion of "literate programming" and has convinced many researchers to switch to computational notebooks from other programming environments. Jupyter Notebooks in particular have seen widespread adoption: as of December 2018, there were more than 3 million Jupyter Notebooks shared publicly on GitHub (https://www.github.com), many of which document academic research.

The interactive and narrative nature of computational notebooks presents unique opportunities for performing and sharing computational research. With some forethought, they can provide not only richly detailed descriptions of analyses but also interactive computing environments for replicating, exploring, and extending them. Yet, as with other computing environments, using notebooks for research requires special care. Interactively running and editing code in notebooks can delete key steps or introduce "hidden state" that confounds analyses and confuses readers. Analyses documented in notebooks cannot be easily rerun if users do not first freeze their dependencies, share their data, and adequately describe their computing environment. And many notebooks lack sufficient descriptive text to guide readers in using them.

The explosive growth of computational notebooks provides a unique opportunity to support computational research, but care must be taken when performing and sharing analyses in notebooks. Given these opportunities and challenges, we have compiled a set of rules, tips, tools, and example notebooks to help guide Jupyter Notebook authors. While we focus on a few core uses of Jupyter Notebooks observed in our own research, many of these rules can be applied to other computational notebooks and use cases. In [Fig 1](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007007#pcbi-1007007-g001), we give a preview of the rules applied at different phases of the notebook development cycle. Whether you use notebooks to track preliminary analyses, to present polished results to collaborators, as finely tuned pipelines for recurring analyses, or for all of the above, following this advice will help you write and share analyses that are easier to read, run, and explore.
