---
title: "SurGBSA: Learning Representations From Molecular Dynamics Simulations"
collection: publications
pubtype: preprint
permalink: /publication/2025-09-10-surgbsa
date: 2025-09-10
venue: 'arXiv'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.03084'
citation: 'Jones D, Yang Y, Lightstone FC, <b>Moshiri N</b>, Allen JE, Rosing TS (2025). "SurGBSA: Learning Representations From Molecular Dynamics Simulations." <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.03084" target="_blank"><i>arXiv</i>:2509.03084</a>'
---
Self-supervised pretraining from static structures of drug-like compounds and proteins enable powerful learned feature representations. Learned features demonstrate state of the art performance on a range of predictive tasks including molecular properties, structure generation, and protein-ligand interactions. The majority of approaches are limited by their use of static structures and it remains an open question, how best to use atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to develop more generalized models to improve prediction accuracy for novel molecular structures. We present SURrogate mmGBSA (SurGBSA) as a new modeling approach for MD-based representation learning, which learns a surrogate function of the Molecular Mechanics Generalized Born Surface Area (MMGBSA). We show for the first time the benefits of physics-informed pre-training to train a surrogate MMGBSA model on a collection of over 1.4 million 3D trajectories collected from MD simulations of the CASF-2016 benchmark. SurGBSA demonstrates a dramatic 27,927x speedup versus a traditional physics-based single-point MMGBSA calculation while nearly matching single-point MMGBSA accuracy on the challenging pose ranking problem for identification of the correct top pose (-0.4% difference). Our work advances the development of molecular foundation models by showing model improvements when training on MD simulations. Models, code and training data are made publicly available.
