---
title: "Real-time genomic surveillance of pathogens through bioinformatics applications"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
talktype: "invited"
permalink: /talks/2023-11-15-pahogen
venue: "1st Meeting of the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) Genomic Surveillance Regional Networks (PAHOGen)"
date: 2023-11-15
location: "Brasilia, Brazil (virtual)"
---
The <a href="https://www.paho.org/" target="_blank">Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)</a> is the specialized international health agency for the Americas. It works with countries throughout the region to improve and protect people’s health. PAHO engages in technical cooperation with its member countries to fight communicable and noncommunicable diseases and their causes, to strengthen health systems, and to respond to emergencies and disasters. To advance these goals, PAHO promotes technical cooperation between countries and works in partnership with ministries of health and other government agencies, civil society organizations, other international agencies, universities, social security agencies, community groups, and other partners. PAHO promotes the inclusion of health in all public policies and the engagement of all sectors in efforts to ensure that people live longer, healthier lives, with good health as their most valuable resource. Under the leadership of its 51 member countries and territories, PAHO sets regional health priorities and mobilizes action to address health problems that respect no borders and that, in many cases, jeopardize the sustainability of health systems. PAHO wears two institutional hats: it is the specialized health agency of the Inter-American System and also serves as Regional Office for the Americas of the <a href="https://www.who.int/" target="_blank">World Health Organization (WHO)</a>, the specialized health agency of the United Nations. From its Washington, D.C., headquarters, 27 country offices and three specialized centers in the region, PAHO promotes evidence-based decision-making to improve and promote health as a driver of sustainable development. I was invited to give a talk at the 1st Meeting of the PAHO Genomic Surveillance Regional Networks (PAHOGen). My talk was titled <i>Real-time genomic surveillance of pathogens through bioinformatics applications</i>.
